The next topic we will discuss today is the personnel safety of the company.
As I said, personnel safety of the company is generally very weak.
In general, everything that concerns the human factor is the weakest link in the corporate security system.
We are considering the issues that we will discuss today.
These are the threats that the company faces from the human factor.
These are the options for implementing these threats.
As I said in the first part, there are threats and options for implementing these threats.
Let's talk about personnel safety.
Let's talk about the procedure of hiring employees,
the procedure of firing employees in terms of personnel safety.
And let's talk about the use of polygraphs in the testing of employees.
The first question is the threats to the interests of the company applied to the human factor.
Basically, the threats to the interests of the company applied to the human factor are three basic threats.
These are all the threats to the actions of the law enforcement officers,
actions that fall under the criminal code or the administrative code.
These can be theft, fraud, or other actions.
The second basic threat is the disclosure of secrets by the law enforcement.
This can be the disclosure of commercial secrets, personal data, professional secrets in the form of medical, notarial, etc.
Everything that concerns the disclosure of information.
The third basic threat is the implementation of incompetent actions.
They can be legal, but they are simply incompetent and can damage the company's interests.
Let's consider the issue of information leakage,
the disclosure of information as a threat.
What are the possible ways to implement this threat?
There are several options.
First, through the employees of the company.
People work in the company, and they can disclose the information that has become known to them in the framework of their work.
This can be done through an employee.
A person is employed in the company to disclose information or to commit illegal actions.
The goal is not fundamental.
A person is employed to commit illegal actions.
This is not a unique thing.
The organization can be implemented by competitors or by organizations.
This is a channel of information disclosure.
The channel of information disclosure is through the fired employees.
People are fired from the organization.
This is a normal process.
We have a labor code that states that any employee can file a complaint about leaving on their own will,
and then be free to work for a maximum of two weeks.
It is difficult to say that an employee will not disclose any confidential information that has become known to him at work.
The legal practice states that such cases are almost unique and difficult to implement.
Therefore, a large threat is posed by the fired employees, because a large channel of information disclosure is through the fired employees.
If we continue to describe the three main channels of information disclosure,
we can say that there are several options for information disclosure through the employees.
The first is the so-called motivated disclosure.
The second is the unmotivated disclosure.
The third is the unmotivated disclosure.
The unmotivated disclosure is a disclosure where there are no motives for disclosing this information.
In a simplified version, this is the simplest and most elementary type of disclosure.
People simply do not represent the value of the information they possess, and are simply unmotivated and unmotivated.
Unfortunately, this is a serious problem.
In teams where a large number of people work, there are people who are simply unmotivated and unmotivated.
Explaining to them what is allowed and what is not allowed, usually does not lead to anything, because people usually disclose everything.
Even if you tell them that it is impossible to say, on the contrary, they will probably disclose it to a greater extent.
Therefore, everything that concerns unmotivated disclosure, these people are usually calculated,
they are usually limited by confidential information, and in the future, under some pretexts, they are fired.
It is very difficult to cure them, and usually useless.
There are certain criteria by which these people are calculated,
that is, in principle, it is easy to calculate them, it is simple to calculate them,
and there are certain psychological features of these people.
These may be people who abuse alcohol, because what is sober in the mind, is drunk in the tongue.
That is, a person in a state of alcohol intoxication simply discloses this information.
These are people who are creatively involved, it is very difficult to draw a line between them,
when a person can still control his actions, and when a person cannot control his actions.
That is, in the burst of creativity, a person can simply disclose and reveal commercial secrets.
These are impulsive people, these are people who are dissatisfied with something,
very often women's groups suffer from this, that is, unmotivated disclosure of information.
A person does not get anything for this, no dividends, no material benefits,
he just discloses information because of his easy-going and talkativeness.
A lot of information is disclosed in smoking rooms, from the point of view of unmotivated things.
Sometimes it is enough to ask a person how are you doing, and get a lot of interesting confidential information.
This is all that concerns unmotivated disclosure through employees of the company.
Motivated disclosure is a disclosure that is based on certain motives.
Moreover, motives can be used not only for disclosure of information, but also for some illegal actions.
If we talk about motives, the list of these motives is quite large.
It cannot be said that it is exhaustive, that is, everything that concerns motivated disclosure,
is usually a psychological feature of people, and all motivated disclosure is based on psychology.
Since psychology is different for each person, the list of motives is not exhaustive.
There are, I would say, the most common motives and the least common motives.
If we talk about the most common motivated disclosure, it is probably money.
This is greed, this is the use of money to get some information or make a person do some actions.
That is, a person discloses information or performs some actions, and in return receives a certain amount of money.
There is an active approach and a passive approach.
The passive approach assumes that a person finds people who know certain information,
of course, valuable information, some kind of private information, people who have more expenses than income,
that is, people in need of money.
They are offered to solve their material problems in exchange for, say, disclosure of some information or performing some actions.
This is the so-called passive approach.
The active approach is when a person in need of some confidential information,
but unfortunately he does not need money,
then an active event is held to make this person need money.
Then he is offered to solve his material problems in order to get some information from him or make him perform some actions.
How to make a person need money?
Again, this is a creative question, there are many different options.
If this is a greedy person, then you can take him to a casino.
If this is an enthusiastic person, then you can give him a woman, or some other things.
There are many ways to make him take a loan that he cannot pay.
This is a creative approach.
This approach is widely used, because money is a fairly universal product that many people need.
The second point that is widely used is the point of offense.
Why does a person perform some actions or disclose information?
Simply because he was offended.
He can be offended for various reasons.
It can be some legal offenses, it can be illegal offenses,
offense for illegal dismissal, offense for not taking a position,
offense for not realizing some creative potential, and so on.
In general, an offended person is always a bomb of slow action,
which, as a rule, explodes at the most inappropriate moment.
So, I want to say that you should try to make sure that you do not offend people.
Because an offended person is usually a problem.
Especially an offended person who knows the commercial secrets and has some certain powers.
There are quite a few cases in life when the offense of a person leads to a serious problem in the company.
The third point is quite common, I would say,
concerning the motivated disclosure of information or motivated performance of some actions.
This is blackmail.
What is blackmail?
Blackmail is clear.
This is a certain compromising action of this person,
which has a certain evidence base of these actions.
And a person is blackmailed by some things,
that is, by some actions that this person has committed or, perhaps, has committed around this person.
As a rule, the higher the position a person occupies,
the more he takes care of his impeccable reputation.
And, as a rule, he is more susceptible to blackmail.
Therefore, this motive for disclosure of information or for performing some actions related to blackmail,
it is usually used for the leading link.
Because blackmailing a loader with immoral acts is quite pointless,
because he can do these immoral acts every day and not regret it at all.
And the leader, let's say, the organization or some leading link,
can be very sensitive in terms of his impeccable reputation.
Blackmailing is generally based on…
Again, there are several approaches.
As a rule, the approach is active and passive.
Active and passive.
The passive approach is to find out the compromising information about the past life of a person.
And it is already a blackmail object.
That is, this is the information or the actions that a person has committed in the past.
In principle, as far as I understand, every person has some dark sides of his life.
As the English say, every person has his own skeleton in the closet.
The most important thing is to find some evidence of these dark moments
and think about how to use them for blackmail or discrediting.
Active blackmail is when there is no time to look for this compromising information
or when there is no time.
Then the organization conducts an event to make a person commit some compromising actions.
In the future, all this is removed, fixed and used for blackmail or discrediting.
Unfortunately, the compilation of compromising information is a shadow business,
which is unfortunately developing in Russia.
There are even whole organizations that specialize in the compilation of compromising information.
The compilation of all these information resources can go in different directions.
There are detectives who are engaged in the collection of information,
including information of dubious content.
Sometimes information agencies are engaged in this.
Unfortunately, this business is quite developed.
The following three reasons for disclosing information are the main reasons.
I say that the list of reasons is not exhaustive.
If we talk about other reasons, what can I pay attention to?
For example, the fear of a person for his life, for himself and his loved ones.
A person can have an impeccable reputation,
he can never take money, never get into a tricky situation,
never commit any compromising actions.
A person is weak by nature,
he has a surrounding in the form of a wife, husband, children, material values, business interests, etc.
For this reason, he can worry.
This can also be a way for one person to influence another person
in order to get some information or to commit some actions.
The motive can be the most common factor of pain.
A person can have an impeccable reputation,
but unfortunately, he will be punished.
He will tell everything he knows and everything he does not know.
Fortunately, this is not so often applied now.
But it should be assumed that a person can tell everything he knows.
Then we talk about methods of influence,
about means, methods, measures, purposefulness, etc.
Therefore, the framework of security is usually based on the fact
that a person can disclose and tell all the information resources he knows.
There is such a motive, let's say, sexual emotionality.
This is not blackmail, this is a so-called sexual partner's set-up
in order to get information or to force him to commit some illegal actions.
At the level of world practice, let's remember the matchmaker Mata Hari in the First World War.
She earned information with her body.
This is a channel of information getting.
There are some motives of information getting, let's call them national motives.
Fortunately or unfortunately, our country is multinational.
Businesses are often built on national characteristics.
If people of one nation are in one organization,
and a person of the same nation or ethnicity is in another organization,
then the channels of influence, that is, the motives, can be based on nationality.
We are of the same blood, from the same settlement, from the same region.
Tell me, share, etc.
There are quite a lot of cases in life.
Motives can be religious.
Although this is not often found in business.
Our country, fortunately or unfortunately, is multi-religious.
And the information can be obtained on the basis of various religious motives and aspects.
There is a motive related to depression.
A person has certain psychological features,
related to some depressive state.
Either he is entering a special state of depression,
or he can periodically fall into a state of depression,
a state of affect, a state of psychological uneasiness.
At this moment, a person receives information,
or forces him to disclose it, or to perform some actions.
There is a motive related to, let's say, the inner adventurism of a person.
Inner adventurism of a person.
This motive is independent, it is usually not used.
This motive is associated with some other motives.
It is clear that there may not be one motive,
there may be several motives for obtaining information.
Basically, this motive is associated with inner adventurism.
It is used for some young people who like to play Stirlitz,
scouts, in some kind of adventure games.
Such cases also occur.
There are motives associated with psychological things.
The basis is psychology.
That is, the motive of obtaining information.
I will stop here in detail.
Two options are common now.
This is the so-called NLP,
Neuro-Linguistic Programming,
and this is hypnosis.
Hypnosis is a more rigid option.
It is used not at every step, but nevertheless it is used.
NLP is now widely used.
In a nutshell, I will draw this thing.
The use of NLP elements in personnel work,
including personnel safety.
NLP, Neuro-Linguistic Programming,
was used for a long time,
probably several centuries ago.
For the first time, the English started to talk about NLP
in the Second World War.
The English scouts started to use NLP elements.
How to get information from a person?
The American scientists translated this into a scientific basis.
In the 1950s, it was generally considered that NLP was an American product.
Although the Americans just made a scientific justification
and put it all on a scientific basis.
The methods of NLP were developed long ago.
Several elements related to NLP are used.
In particular, if you want to get in touch with a person
in order to get information from him,
there is such a principle of mirroring in NLP.
You duplicate the movement, walk, breath of another person.
After a while, there is a certain comfort between you
and a certain position of one person from another.
And you can try to get information from a person.
What do I mean by duplication?
A person is sitting in the same position.
You can adjust your breathing to his breathing.
If we talk about safety,
thieves and pocket watchmen use this method very widely.
When a person is sitting in a train and he is sleeping,
a thief sits down and starts to swing.
After a while, there is a certain harmony between these two people.
And this thief can say,
let's give him a wallet and he will give it to him.
This is the relationship between each other
at the level of neural linguistic programming.
Let's say NLP is a method of transferring information.
It is a way to convince a person to do something or to disclose something.
Each person has a certain channel of receiving information.
All people are divided into so-called audiolysts, visualists and kinesthetics.
Audiolysts are people who perceive the world through the organs of vision.
They need to see everything.
They say, I see.
In order to achieve the location of these people,
that is, to make them disclose some information,
they need to be transmitted through their organs of vision.
They need to write everything,
they need to look good,
because this is primary information for them.
Audiolysts perceive everything by ear.
They say, I hear.
In order to achieve their location or make them do something,
make them disclose information,
they need to be transmitted through the organs of hearing.
If we talk about the third direction of kinesthetics,
they usually say, I feel.
These are people who need to touch, feel everything.
That is, to receive information from the outside world
through the contact, through kinesthetic sensations.
In order to achieve their location,
to make them do something or to transmit some information,
they need to touch, feel something.
Then they will transmit this information.
Therefore, one of the directions,
for example, how the NLP element is used,
is to understand who is in front of you,
an audiolyst, a visualist or a kinesthetic,
and try to convince him to do something
exactly on the channel that he has the most developed.
This is NLP.
NLP is widely used now
to train sales staff.
That is, how to convince a person to buy something.
NLP is widely used
to convince a person to do something,
in particular, to buy something.
NLP is widely used in personnel security,
in negotiations.
That is, in order to convince a person to do something,
to convince him to make a decision,
to tell about something,
NLP is used.
Hypnosis is a more serious thing,
a rather scary thing.
It is used less often than NLP,
but nevertheless it is a very serious threat
in terms of personnel security.
What is the threat?
As a rule, everything that concerns
illegal actions on hypnosis
is either disclosure of information,
or the execution of some actions,
or, again, the conviction of something.
Moreover, disclosure of information
in a state of hypnosis,
a person can disclose this information,
and in the future he will not even remember
that he first told something to someone,
and he will not remember,
and he will tell only the truth,
only what actually exists.
In a state of hypnosis, he will not deceive,
he will not deceive,
he will not mislead,
he will tell the truth.
This is a feature of hypnosis.
And he will not remember that he told something to someone.
You can make someone do some actions
in a state of hypnosis.
Gypsies use hypnosis a lot.
Unfortunately, these are such illegal actions
that can be done using elements of hypnosis.
In banking security,
you can face problems with hypnosis.
In particular, a few years ago,
there was a problem with exchange points.
A person who had a cashier
entered the cashier of the exchange point
in a state of hypnotic sleep,
gave, for example, 10 rubles,
convinced her that it was not 10 rubles,
but 1000 dollars,
and the cashier gave a change,
and the cashier,
the employee of the exchange point,
exchanged the change
based on a completely different bill.
There was such a problem.
A whole group of people
who were engaged in such things
was neutralized.
The problem of hypnosis,
unfortunately, is quite relevant.
How to protect yourself from hypnosis?
Immediately a question arises.
How is it solved?
It is quite difficult to introduce
a person into a hypnotic sleep.
There are times when you can understand
that something is wrong with a person.
At this moment, try to get away from this person,
try to stop some actions.
Hypnosis is transmitted through the gaze,
through hearing, through touch.
Therefore, at the initial stage,
you can still try to do something.
Hypnosis cannot be said
to be some kind of contraindicatory
initial action,
or rather, that it is initial evil.
It is like a way of affecting
one person on another.
This method can be used
either for good or evil.
Hypnosis is taught.
There is such a concept as medical hypnosis.
That is, the state of hypnosis
takes a person out of a state
of severe stress.
Hypnosis can be used
for contraindicatory purposes.
That is, the purpose, as I said,
is either to get information,
or to perform some actions,
or to gain a belief.
There are quite exotic methods
to come up with a purpose for hypnosis.
A person enters a state of hypnosis,
reads certain information,
and then leaves the state of hypnosis.
He moves to another country,
where he is introduced
to the state of hypnosis.
He tells all this,
although he will not remember it himself.
That is, it is like using a person
as a carrier of certain information.
Unfortunately, hypnosis and all
that concerns psychological methods
is one of the motives for obtaining information.
On the basis of not only the conscious,
but also the unconscious motive.
There may be other motives
for obtaining information,
but I have described them to you
as the most common and significant.
If we talk about the objects
that are most subject to the motives
for obtaining information,
based on the motives that exist,
these are those that have certain defects
in behavior, in psychological appearance,
passion for alcohol,
sexual entertainment, drugs, etc.
Or those who have a biographical stain.
All these motives are used
to obtain information.
But what is the purpose of hypnosis?
What is the purpose of hypnosis?
Objects suitable for the motives
for obtaining information
are those who have debts.
It is clear that people who have debts
are a group of risk.
These are people who can be used
by various techniques
in order to either get information
from them or force them to do some actions.
People who are strongly attached to something.
People who, for some reason,
are not able to get information
from them,
and who are very irritated for some reason.
So-called recruitment based on resentment.
I did not tell these points
from the point of view
that you received information
from someone,
and used these motivated things.
I probably told it from the point of view
that these motives
for obtaining information
or for performing some actions
can be used against you.
If you are an object,
let's say, an LPR,
a person who makes decisions,
then these motives
can be used against you
in order to either get information
from you or force you to do something.
Therefore, there are some recommendations
that, let's say,
recommendations on counteracting
the establishment of so-called
recruitment contact,
or motivated contact.
Well, it is not to get involved
in quarrels and scandals,
not to show excessive awareness
in anything,
except when it is required
during some business negotiations.
It is clear that
those people who usually
use these motivated approaches
are those people,
let's say,
who either know something
or can learn something.
If a person does not know
what to do,
then, in general,
there is no point in
performing some recruitment approaches
in order to get some information.
Therefore, it is not appropriate,
probably, as a recommendation,
to show that you know something,
have some commercial secrets,
some secrets, and so on.
There is a recommendation
related to the storage
of your commercial secrets,
your, let's say,
official secrets
from your close friends.
Well, this is due to the fact
that they will be able
to get information
not only from you,
but also from your environment,
that is, from your close friends.
First of all, you are just setting up
these people, because they will
already receive information from them.
Well, of course, there is no guarantee
that they will protect your secrets.
That is, they told their life
companions some commercial secrets,
and the next day
it became known all over the city.
Unfortunately, there were such
real-life cases.
Well, the analysis of your life,
probably,
is not the goal
of what I have achieved
in 30, 40,
50, 60 years.
The analysis of your life
from the point of view of determining
some motives in this life,
some moments related
to problems,
to situations
that can be used
for blackmail or discrediting.
Well, it is clear that
nothing can be changed
from the past life,
that is, you will not change anything
in your past life,
but at least you will be able
to illuminate these moments
from your point of view
to break the ground
from those people
Well, the recommendation
may be to find out
your weaknesses,
that is, to analyze your psychological
components,
your hobbies, alcohol, sex,
money, character traits, and so on.
I, of course, do not urge you
to change these character traits
if you think it is necessary,
but for God's sake.
Just keep in mind that these approaches,
motivated approaches to disclosure of information,
they usually use some psychological
components of a person.
Knowing them, you will simply know
that these motives may be suitable for you
in order to get information from you
or make you do some actions.
Well, probably
what else can be recommended?
Well, the analysis of contacts
is also a recommendation
to counteract the establishment
of such agent contacts,
because if you understand
why a person starts
trying to get close to you,
it's probably good.
That is, you need to give a clear report
why a person starts trying to get close to you.
If it is some kind of physiological
needs, it is understandable.
When it is not clear why a person
does it, then it is always
a so-called hazard.
Well, this is the point.
So, what else
I would like to draw
your attention to?
Well, now we are with you,
in general, I told you
the moments related
to the threats
that arise from the human factor,
and some of the moments
I covered the options
for the implementation of these threats.
The next aspect is
how to build personnel work,
how to build relationships
with the staff
from the point of view of personnel security,
in order to neutralize all the moments
related to the threat
of disclosure of information
or the threat of committing
some illegal actions.
So, personnel work.
So, here I will cover
some aspects
that are related to security,
almost directly related to security,
but I will not go into
the details of this topic,
which should be taken into account
when the event will be held.
So, this is the motivation of the staff.
Motivation of the staff.
The term is quite fashionable,
motivation of the staff.
There is even such a term as
motivated staff,
unmotivated staff.
I like the term motivated
because it is associated
with the term to swear.
Nevertheless,
such a term is used.
What is motivation?
Motivation is, in fact,
not a hook,
but some reasons
why a person works in an organization.
Naturally, the more reasons,
the more hooks,
the more moments
that make a person work
in an organization,
the less problematic
this person is.
With a motivated person,
it is much easier to solve
security issues.
There is even a whole seminar
about motivation.
I will just tell you
the problem of motivation
from the point of view
of personnel security.
All motivation is divided
into two large groups.
This is immaterial.
It is clear.
Material motivation is
motivation that is
related to certain material benefits.
Immaterial motivation is
motivation that is not
related to material benefits.
So, more strongly
immaterial motivation is considered.
It is clear that
material motivation is related
to money or material benefits.
In any case,
some organization can offer
more material benefits,
and a person will leave you.
Therefore, it is believed
that the strongest motivation
is immaterial.
The strongest, perhaps,
immaterial motivation is
ideology.
Ideology.
It is difficult to achieve
ideological motivation
in a commercial structure.
I have not encountered
companies where the staff
is motivated from the point of view
of ideology.
But if it succeeds,
it will be a very strong and solid company.
Ideology.
What can be the forms,
what can be the options?
It can be, for example,
religion.
It can be some kind of
patriotic or corporate idea.
It can be
the struggle of a small
oppressed people
for their self-awareness
and independence.
It can be ideology or an idea.
From the point of view of immaterial motivation,
let's say, in Moscow,
it is very common,
it is the closeness of work to home.
The closeness of work to home.
It is clear that
if a person lives in the north of Moscow,
goes to the south of Moscow every day,
spends several hours on the road,
if a person finds
a company that will pay,
all other
motivation systems will be the same,
and a person finds
work near the house,
he will leave the organization to work
near the house.
So, the immaterial motivation
in the form of the closeness of work to home
is typical only for Moscow.
For regional companies,
it may not be very typical.
What can be noted
from the immaterial?
Let's say, self-employment.
Self-employment.
Very strong immaterial motivation
is due to the fact that
a person works because he likes it.
He likes to paint.
He will paint every day.
If you assign him to a position
related to leadership,
he will not work because he does not like it.
Here,
from the immaterial motivation,
is the moral-psychological climate.
Moral-psychological climate.
Why does a person work?
Because it is a very comfortable
moral-psychological climate.
A person may not get a salary for half a year
and will go to work.
Why does he go to work?
The team is good, the company is good.
And a person can get
very decent money,
but he leaves work because
everyone is like scorpions in a jar,
everyone is trying to sting each other.
Material motivation
is money.
A person must receive
a certain monetary reward
for his work.
This monetary reward
should not be lower
than the average
in the region,
in the industry,
in the position, etc.
Then it will be material motivation
based on money.
It can be from material motivation
some kind of social package.
Now it is a very fashionable direction.
In personnel policy,
it is a social package.
In addition to money,
a person receives certain benefits
related to social protection,
social security.
It can be a compensation
for travel,
free lunch,
some kind of trips,
a social package.
It can be a brand.
I would put the word
brand here.
A brand company.
A person works
in a very respectable
brand company.
He is proud of it.
He has a certain corporate culture, etc.
Material motivation
usually includes
working conditions.
Working conditions.
A person works
in good conditions,
with air conditioners,
with repairs, with Euro-repair,
modern equipment, etc.
The other thing is that
working conditions can be much worse.
It is not motivated.
The material motivation
is financial commitment.
Financial commitment.
It is about the fact
that a person binds
a worker to himself
by financial commitments.
He can send him to school,
pay for his education,
buy him an apartment,
etc.
A person is bound
to a company by financial commitments.
The most important thing here
is not to overdo it
and not to abuse it.
If a person is too much
bound to a company by financial commitments,
it is difficult to get rid of it.
This is a very common
material motivation of a person.
There may be
some other options.
For example,
this is not material,
but a given authority.
A given authority.
It can be
some personal goals
of a person.
It can be material
or not.
For example,
a person gets a work experience.
He is interested in getting
a certain work experience.
This is a motivation
of a person working in a company.
You can write it down further.
This is not an exhaustive list.
These are just the main directions
of a person's work experience.
I want to add
one more thing.
I want to stop at this point.
The more motivated
a person is,
the less problems
he will have.
I have encountered
situations
when a company
is creating a promising direction
or a promising project.
There are two candidates
for this position.
One is Ivan Ivanov,
the other is Petrov Petrovich.
The situation is analyzed
by these people
and by the security service.
The security service
says that Ivan Ivanov
is well motivated
and has a lot of reasons
why he works
in this company.
There are no problems
with this information.
Petrov Petrovich
is a professional,
but he has no reasons
why he works here.
Either we should appoint Ivan Ivanov
or Petrov.
We should organize
an event
to motivate this person.
We should bind him to this company.
Then we can trust him
with a promising project
if we want him to be a leader
and a competitor.
The motivation of the staff
is directly connected
with the security service.
The next thing
I would like to point out
is the security service line.
It is
professionalism.
Professionalism is not only
among the security service employees.
Everyone should be a professional
in his or her field.
Then it is much more effective
to build a security system
than when
non-professionals work.
Professionalism is achieved
by a competent selection of staff.
You can train your staff
to become professionals.
You can use a staff agency.
You can recruit people.
You can do hand-hunting.
You can lure staff.
The point is
to form a team.
It is a fashionable method
of teamwork.
The next thing I would like to point out
is the moral and psychological climate.
The moral and psychological climate.
It is important to understand
that the security of the staff
and the security of the organization
depends on the moral and psychological climate.
To put it simply,
if the CEO
rides the latest Mercedes model
and the employees
do not receive their salary for six months,
then there is no need
to talk about serious security.
You will never build a security system there.
The moral and psychological climate
is achieved by several things.
It is a whole set of events.
It is like a training process.
The formation of
the so-called corporate culture
is achieved.
The corporate culture.
I can say that
the corporate culture
is based on the behavior
of a person.
It is not based on
any external forms.
We all wear red jackets.
This is our corporate culture.
If a person wears a blue jacket,
it is a violation of corporate culture.
It is not about
the appearance.
It is about the behavior.
It is a code of behavior.
The moral and psychological climate
can be formed
by the work of psychologists.
Psychologists
are often used
for the security
of the staff
and the corporate security.
Because many problems
can be solved
by the professional work
of a psychologist
when the psychologist
is a professional.
It is about
the moral and psychological climate.
It is about the selection of staff.
There are organizations
where psychologists work
professionally
for the security of the staff.
But I can say that
the organizations
do not use the resources of psychologists.
For example,
a team is excited
because it is not efficient.
A psychologist,
after testing the team
and making a psychological portrait
of each person,
will tell the psychologist
to remove a person from the team.
The team becomes calm
and efficient.
This is the work of a psychologist.
Psychologists are widely used
when setting up staff.
It is right to understand
that there is a psychological feature
of a person that cannot be changed.
But it can be used.
There are four types of personalities.
There is a blood type,
a melancholic,
a phlegmatic, a choleric.
It is what is given by nature
and what does not change.
Knowing who is in front of you
of these four types of personalities,
you can understand
how to use it.
There is a concept
of a strong nervous system,
a person can work
for 8 hours
in a monotonous and scrupulous way.
Then he should rest for 8 hours.
A weak nervous system
is a person who works
for half an hour,
then he should rest for half an hour.
It does not mean that it is a bad
or good nervous system.
It is a certain psychological feature.
Knowing it, you will set up people
and there will be fewer problems.
Psychologists can assess
whether a person can work with people
or not.
If a person is well-led
by 5 people,
you will put him
on a team of 100 people.
The psychology of a person
will not allow him
to lead 100 people.
If he leads 5 people well,
he will not be able to lead 100 people.
Not because he is bad,
but because it is a psychological feature.
There is a concept of an introvert.
A person is either closed
or communicative.
If you put a person
to work in a closed sales department,
he will not be able to work
because he is a thing in himself.
That is why psychologists work very well
in the field of personnel safety.
There are
other points
about personnel safety.
There is a certain percentage ratio.
If we talk about
theft,
then the issue of
theft is a problem.
10% of people
always steal.
No matter
what motivation
they have,
what salary they have.
This is a habit.
10%
never
steal.
They
steal
because
they believe
that
no matter
how difficult
the situation is,
they will never steal.
80%
steal when
there are conditions
and when there is no control.
They steal
when there are conditions.
When there are conditions.
Roughly speaking,
a person will take
some money
when he understands
that he will be punished.
You can argue about the percentage.
It is written in smart books.
This is about our country.
In Muslim countries,
where there is a fence
where fingers and hands are cut off,
the percentage may be completely different.
In our country, the ratio is approximately the same.
So,
based on this,
what is the task
of the security service?
It is clear that
those people who always steal
should be eliminated.
Those people who never steal
should be left
if they represent something.
The biggest problem is
these 80%.
The main task here
is not to create conditions for stealing.
If you are engaged
in some provocative activities,
you will put money somewhere
and see who will take it and who will not.
You will find out that
90% of people
will take the money
if they know that no one sees them.
You can fire all of them
and get new 90%.
The ratio will be exactly the same.
I am very skeptical
about various
provocative activities
of the security service
because
the percentage is exactly the same.
We should not create conditions.
I would like to draw your attention
to one more thing.
There is a term
for critical or problematic people.
To address
the attention
of either critical people
or critical employees.
What is it?
As I said,
if we talk about
disclosure of information,
the whole team is scanned
in terms of identifying
those people who can
do the right thing
or disclose the information.
Those people
are paid more attention.
What do I mean?
Let's say,
IT specialist
or IT security
is engaged in protection
of information resources.
This is a critical person
because he needs special attention.
The secretary of the company
may not know anything
but she is responsible
for a lot of confidential documents.
It can be
the same cleaners
who can
do some illegal actions
in terms of
disclosure of information,
installation of listening devices, etc.
If we talk about
critical employees
who can do some illegal actions,
the whole team is scanned
and it looks like
the person
needs money
for different reasons.
The patient needs an expensive surgery
and the patient has no money
for the surgery.
But he will have to solve this problem.
We can assume that he will do
some illegal actions
because he will try
to find money illegally.
Many things
can be predicted.
You know,
a person came from
a state-owned organization
of a factory
where the principle was
that the owner is not a guest
and he has to carry every nail.
The person has a habit
of stealing.
We can assume that he has this habit
and he has not gotten rid of it.
Let's recall a famous story
about a golden calf
when Shura Balaganov
gave a huge amount of money
to the bandit
who would have enough money
for his days.
And he got into a tram
with 3 rubles.
Why did he get into the tram?
Because of his habit.
Many things can be predicted.
If you see
or hear about
security services
that there is a security guard
and they have some intimate relations
and they are connected by work,
so the security guard is watching the cashier,
then you can assume
that their actions will be illegal.
They should be divorced,
at least by the service,
so that they are not connected.
Many illegal actions
can be predicted.
A woman works,
she marries a man
who works in a competing company.
Can we predict any consequences?
I think we can.
We can try to predict
and prevent
any consequences
related to these critical people.
I will give you
only a few examples.
You can describe it in detail later.
Life is too multifaceted,
so many things can be predicted.
It is possible.
I will remind you
about the old principle
of the personnel policy.
It is the principle of a wick and a gingerbread.
A wick and a gingerbread.
It is very effective
from the perspective of personnel security.
The principle of a wick and a gingerbread
should be applied
to people.
There should be a gingerbread
in the form of motivation.
There should be a wick
that is in the form of
responsibility.
Responsibility related to
the responsibility of the staff,
administrative responsibility,
criminal responsibility.
I will also draw your attention
to the personnel policy
on the line of personnel security.
This is the relationship
between the security service
and the personnel.
And the personnel.
Such relations will have to be established
in any case.
It should be based on
the example I gave
about the barricades.
There should be a barricade
where the security service and the personnel
are not allowed to go.
And there should be
some illegal actions
or potential violations.
How to build it?
There are different points.
In principle, the security service
should help the personnel.
The personnel should look
at the security service
not as a monster,
a mini KGB,
who walks, looks,
peeps, listens.
The security service should help
the personnel.
But according to the law,
it may not do it.
According to the law,
the security service
should provide security
only to the founder.
It is not obligatory
to solve the personal problems
of the employees of the enterprise.
But I think it should be done
to build these relations.
And this help may not
be a big deal.
For example,
a person sells a car
and receives cash.
And the person asks
to give a couple of people
to stand next to him.
There is nothing wrong
or expensive for the security service.
But this person will treat
the security service
as an organization
that can help and support.
And, of course,
the security service
should provide
a certain number of people.
They are called
voluntary assistants.
This problem exists.
Such people are not always
called sex workers,
secret employees,
drummers,
knockers, and so on.
But here we should start
from the fact that there are
a lot of people
who are not
able to work.
We should treat
the information
of the security service
positively or at least
calmly.
If you drive a car
in Germany,
10 old ladies will call the police
and report that the car
has exceeded the speed limit.
They do not perceive
this quality.
Everyone understands that a car
that has exceeded the speed limit
is a threat
to the residents,
to the elderly,
to the children,
to the grandchildren, and so on.
The goal is to ensure
the security of the organization.
The more solid and secure
the organization is,
the better the staff.
But this problem exists.
I will also mention
a rather fashionable
area.
It is the use of polygraph
in the company testing.
The use of polygraph.
What is a polygraph?
It is a lie detector.
I think everyone has heard about it.
It is a legal business.
It is a legal product.
You can find
a lot of companies
that provide services
of polygraph.
They sell polygraph.
There is nothing illegal here.
You can't say
that it is a tool
of some special services.
What should be taken into account
if the security service
will use polygraph
in the personnel security?
The first thing
is the legal aspect.
The testing of polygraph
should be voluntary.
You can't test a person
with polygraph
just because
the director wants it.
If a person doesn't want
to be tested,
you can't force him.
So, usually,
if a polygraph is being tested,
the application is collected
and the test is conducted.
Usually, it is a statement
of the testers' consent
to test polygraph.
There are some features
of the contactless polygraph
that can be legended.
You can't legend the contactless one.
This is the first point.
Voluntary.
The second point
of the polygraph testing
is that the result
is not a proof.
You can't fire a person
just because he showed polygraph.
You can't impose a conviction
on a person just because he showed polygraph.
It is like Stirlitz's
information to think.
It is where you need to dig deeper.
It is a kind of information to think.
When is polygraph used?
Usually,
it is a
method of work.
A method of work.
There are organizations
that
constantly
use polygraph
when they come to work.
If there is a need,
it can be done.
When they come to work,
they usually find out
the standard options.
Does a person
use drugs?
Is he connected
to criminal elements?
Is he connected to criminals?
To competitors?
Polygraph is used
in the current activity.
What is the current activity?
The leader
wants to know
if the bribes are taken or not.
Do the employees
sit on the rolls?
There is a kind of current activity.
It is a common
case.
Nevertheless, there are companies
where the current activity
is provided
through polygraph.
The most common
option is
a service investigation.
A service
investigation.
When something
happened,
some money was stolen,
then a service investigation
is conducted
using polygraph.
It is the most common
option.
The types of polygraph
that you need to know
if you
use polygraph services.
Polygraph.
What is available
on the market,
what you can buy.
There are two options.
Contact
and contactless.
Contactless.
It is a classic
polygraph.
There are 8-12 sensors
that track a person
and measure his parameters.
Breathing,
abdominal, chest,
pulse, sweat,
voice, pupil,
tremor sensor,
motor activity,
muscle activity, etc.
These sensors are
connected to a block
where all the information is stored.
Then a computer is connected,
graphics are built, etc.
The principle of operation is simple.
It was developed in the 1920s.
First, a person is set up.
A polygraph is set up
for a specific person.
First, a person is asked
questions,
the answers to which are not known.
For example,
it is winter now,
and it is clear that a person answers yes.
It is necessary to answer
either yes or no.
There is no need to think,
fantasize, or invent.
The parameters of a person are measured
when it is clear that he is telling the truth.
After that,
mathematical calculations
give certain conclusions
about whether a person is telling the truth
or not.
This is a classical contact polygraph.
A contact polygraph
is usually implemented
as a mind reader.
It is a little bit
complicated.
It is a simple
computer program.
It is a computer program
that can be used
to read a book.
There is a slightly different principle.
The principle is a reaction of a person
to some questions.
It is a question
whether the answer is meaningful
or not.
Usually, it is implemented
in the following way.
You test a person on drugs.
You are interested in the topic of drugs
that are applicable to this person.
Words are typed
that are related to drugs.
The screen of the monitor
shows this word for 15 milliseconds.
Then it is closed
by some chaotic set of numbers.
A person needs to press
a magic button
like a joystick.
He needs to press it.
The reaction of a person is measured.
The reaction will be different
depending on whether
this word is meaningful or not.
It can be either fast
or slow.
It will change.
Then the meaning
of this topic
is determined.
If a person
is indifferent to this topic
and has a smooth reaction,
his reaction will be the same
as when answering all other questions
or neutral questions.
A person can have
no words.
He will be covered by numbers.
A person's consciousness
will not react
to this word
with such a small value.
A word for 0.15 seconds
will not be reacted by consciousness.
You will not see what is written there.
You will see only the numbers
that will close this word.
But at the subconscious level
a person will react.
The reaction will be different.
This is the basis of the action
of this polygraph.
It is widely popular.
It has many advantages
in relation to the contact.
It starts from time.
Testing one person
on a contactless polygraph
is much faster.
It can be legendarized.
A person will press a button
and he will not even know
that he is being tested on a polygraph.
He will just say
that he is being measured
by a person's reaction.
It is much less painful.
When a person is confused
by wires and sensors,
it is a serious psychological trauma
or psychological pressure.
A regular button
is much less painful
for a person.
Here are two options
either contact or contactless
that are available on the market
and can be bought.
There is another option
but it is more theoretical.
It is developed by Americans.
The idea is that
when a person tells the truth,
he is involved in one number
of brain cells.
If he tries to deceive,
he is involved in a much larger number
of brain cells.
The number of brain cells
involved is measured.
If there are many of them,
there is a possibility
that a person is deceiving.
This polygraph
is still in the theoretical development stage.
Contact or contactless
is what you can buy
on the market.
If we talk about
the use of a polygraph,
what should we pay attention to?
If you will
periodically use a polygraph
during a service investigation,
you can invite a specialist.
If you will use it every day,
you need to take
a person,
buy this device,
teach this person,
take him to the US,
and so on.
In the vast majority of cases,
people usually use other services.
Here is another thing
I want to draw your attention to
regarding the polygraph.
Keep in mind that a lot depends on the polygraphist.
A polygraph is
a tool
that is like a gun.
A good gun
will hit the target
in good hands,
and in bad hands
it will not hit the target.
Although the gun itself will be good.
Therefore, a polygraph is good.
But it is always deceiving not the polygraph,
but the polygraphist.
If you will choose
a polygraphist or polygraphologist,
pay special attention to the polygraphist.
A lot depends on him.
There are
some ways to deceive the polygraph.
There is a pharmacological way,
that is,
the use of some
inhibiting or stimulating drugs.
There is a physiological
way,
a mechanical way,
that is, the use of some painful sensations
to bite your tongue,
to knock down
the polygraph.
There is a psychological way,
that is, to think about something
that is significant or insignificant for you.
Nevertheless,
a good polygraphist will understand
that he is being deceived.
A contactless polygraph,
what is good about it,
it is difficult to deceive it,
because a person does not even know
that he is being tested and will not understand
what he is being tested for.
Unlike a contactless polygraph,
when it is clear that it is a polygraph,
that all these questions are being tested.
Therefore, this is the point.
Whether you will apply it or not,
you will see for yourself,
but at least it is one of the directions
of the formation of the personnel security.
Here,
what else
I will draw your attention to.
Try not to plant bombs
of slow action
from the point of view
of personnel security.
This is according to the line
Do not plant bombs
of slow action.
I have already given examples.
For example,
if you fire a person
who knows your commercial secrets,
in a bad way,
it is a bomb of slow action.
There are many such options.
Here I can recommend
the application of a test period
for employees,
because, as a rule,
this is also related to the issue of security.
Apply a certain policy
to select personnel
applicable to
certain categories of people.
First of all,
it is critical people.
This is related to IT specialists,
because, as a rule,
they can pose a serious threat.
A competent selection of the head
of the security service,
where the first place,
in my opinion,
is not even a question of professionalism,
but a question of loyalty.
To people
who are appointed
to conduct some promising projects.
These are some critical people.
Now let's talk about
the acceptance
and dismissal
of employees.
If we write down
the acceptance questions,
what does the security service decide?
What do the personnel decide?
The personnel decide
the selection of employees,
the selection of personnel
with personnel,
and the issue of
the documentation.
What does the security service decide?
The security service
mainly decides
the inspection of employees.
The inspection of candidates
for positions in your organization.
The difficulty here is
that it is very difficult
to collect information
in a legal way.
There is a concept
of personal data,
there are personal data laws,
and it is very difficult
to collect legal information.
Unlike legal information collection
for legal persons.
Everything can be done legally,
but for personal data
it is difficult.
The inspection of the security service
of candidates
is based on different things.
It is mainly assessed
by the threat to the organization
or not.
In order to make a decision
whether a person poses a threat
to the organization or not,
the circle of information
about what is collected is determined.
What information is collected?
What information
is collected about the candidate?
It is clear that
all the information
about a person
can be collected,
but it will be expensive and meaningless.
You can collect information
about the coffee service
in the kitchen
and what is the name of your favorite dog.
From the point of view of security
for the organization,
the circle of questions
and answers is determined.
This is all about
objective data.
Objective data
can be obtained
by means of documents
that a person presents.
For example, a passport,
driver's license,
education documents, etc.
Objective data
can be collected
by means of a questionnaire
that a person fills out.
This is a normal practice
when a person
fills out a questionnaire.
Try to make the questionnaire
well-composed.
This is the information
that a person provides about himself
and which you want to receive
directly from a person.
Usually, it consists of several sheets
and many questions are discussed there,
including financial obligations
that a person has.
It is clear that if a person
pays a loan
for some mortgage
more than you will pay per month,
then the question arises
where he gets the money.
In this questionnaire,
when you form it,
make sure that
the person gave you this information
voluntarily and does not object
to checking the information.
The person must sign it.
Keep in mind that there is an article
on dismissal of a person
under the Labor Code
for false information.
What information is collected?
Information on violations
and crimes.
You are interested in
whether a person was ever
involved in administrative
violations or crimes.
It is clear whether a person
was ever involved in criminal crimes.
Whether he was on the wanted list,
whether he was a criminal,
and so on.
Again,
it is not necessarily
bad, it is definitely good.
However,
if you take a driver
and see that he was involved
10 times in violation of the speed limit,
2 times in the abuse
of alcohol,
then it is clear
that it is better not to take such a driver.
I am saying that a smart person
will not be caught.
He is punished for what?
Not for what he did,
but for what he got caught.
Therefore, it is better not to take people
for criminal responsibility
or for administrative violations.
Although all this is very individual
and subjective.
First, we look at the direction
in which we collect information.
Financial obligations.
I have already said
financial obligations.
Now, unfortunately,
very common,
unfortunately,
fortunately,
are loans,
consumer loans,
mortgages, and so on.
This is not good
from the point of view of security.
If a person has accumulated a huge amount
of financial obligations,
it is clear that he must pay.
He can commit illegal actions
precisely because he has nothing to return.
Let's say,
a connection with competitors.
It is clear that you are interested
whether this Cossack is not sent
and whether he is not satisfied
with your organization,
with some illegal goals
that his competitors
have set up.
They look at the connection
with the organization of crime.
With the organization of crime.
Again, from the point of view
of the threat that this person poses
if he has some kind of
extensive connection with the organization of crime.
It can be both a threat and not a threat.
Again, this information is simply collected.
Then it must be analyzed
and some decisions are made.
It is analyzed from the point of view
of some amoral actions.
Amoral actions.
The concept of amoral actions
is quite subjective.
But, as a rule,
there is a classical approach,
a classical interpretation of these things.
It is related to drunkenness,
to some unmarried relationships
and everything else.
The connection is analyzed
with some organizations.
It can be the most diverse organization.
Good or bad organizations.
Of course, from the point of view
of threats.
If you take a person
and you get information
that he is connected
with some nationalist movements,
with the Kinheads,
with something else.
Why do you need extra problems?
Here, from the point of view
of some religious views,
it is evaluated
from the classical point of view
of religion, it is good.
As a rule, people do not
commit any illegal actions.
Although there are some religious
movements that can harm
your company.
It is analyzed
from the point of view
of a person's psychological features.
Psychological features.
I have already talked about them
when I talked about the relationship
between work and psychologists.
Relative relationships are analyzed.
Under the relative relationship
you can include many things.
This is the relationship
between fathers and children.
in the family, where parents work,
where the wife works, where the children work.
In general, the relationship in the family
is based on the fact
that a person is in the stage of divorce.
He is very worried.
It is clear that in the near future
he will not be a worker
because this fact of divorce
can have a very strong effect on him.
What is analyzed?
The work in the past.
From the point of view of committing
any illegal actions,
the reason for the dismissal is analyzed.
In the vast majority of cases
in the employment book
they write quite classic things
related to the departure
at will or by agreement of the parties.
90% of dismissals
are based on these articles.
The security service
must understand the real reason
for the dismissal.
A person can commit
some illegal actions.
The company does not want to quarrel with him.
To clarify the relationship,
the company must write a statement
and leave.
In fact, the person left
because he was kicked out.
The material situation is analyzed.
The material situation is analyzed
from the point of view of the ratio
of the material situation
and the positions of the person.
If it is clear,
the material situation
corresponds to the positions
of the person
in various organizations.
When a person worked
in low-level organizations,
in low-level positions,
and has a very serious
material situation,
the question arises why.
There is a concept
of a rastro sign of danger.
It is necessary to understand
why this happens.
There is a rastro sign of danger.
There is some kind of
mismatch and illogicity
of the situation.
It is possible to analyze
the number of connections
with the administrative resource,
connections with some organizations,
the ability of this person,
and so on.
The level of information
collected by a person
depends on
the position of this person.
It is clear that if you take
a person to a position of a loader,
you may be interested
only in a very small amount
of information about this person.
If you take a person to a position of a top manager,
there is a more serious level
of information collection
and verification.
If we talk about
channels of information collection,
what methods of collection are there?
I have already said that
methods are limited
to such concepts as personal data.
Basically,
it is what a person
reports himself
on the resume,
on the interviews,
on the objective materials
that he brings,
such as documents,
passport,
employment certificate,
and so on.
Getting information
on the Internet,
that is, having typed the last name
of a person in various
search engines of the Internet,
you can understand or get
some information about this person.
In particular,
educational schools
often make graduates of a certain year
with photos,
surnames,
and the person's
face and school
where he graduated.
This is a real experience.
It is impossible to hide
the year and the school he graduated from.
Just typing his last name and his school
is enough to hide the year.
Using various databases.
Unfortunately,
there are a lot of such databases.
Unfortunately or fortunately,
illegal, semi-underground databases
can be supplied on the Internet
and sold on the markets.
Unfortunately, this is an objective reality.
Our personal data
is not well protected.
Security services often use
these databases.
It is necessary to assume that
this is not legal information,
it can be cut off,
it can be incomplete.
At least, if a person
comes to you to work,
he is identified by the database
of a lost passport,
at least he should be guarded.
If he does not go through
any database,
it does not mean that he is white and fluffy.
It means that you need to dig deeper.
It can be
a trip to the workplace,
a conversation with people
with whom he used to work
or with whom he used to contact.
There are other options.
You can make inquiries
to the educational institutions
where he graduated from.
It is necessary to assume that
no one is obliged to answer these inquiries.
This is about the reception.
If, from the point of view of the security service,
a person is not a threat,
then usually it is a questionnaire
that is filled by the person.
The head of the security service
signs that he does not object.
If he objects,
then this candidate does not need
to explain anything.
Nothing is officially written.
The leadership of the company
says that, in their opinion,
these are the reasons
why they do not recommend
hiring this person.
However, I say again
that this is not an official reason for refusal.
Therefore, official papers are not written.
This is all about
the reception at work.
As for the dismissal,
I will write a little here.
The dismissal of employees.
The security service also
widely applies
the reasons
for dismissal.
Of course, it is necessary
to look at the level
of the person who is dismissed.
Basically,
what is applied
and what is recommended.
It is necessary to find out
the real reasons for dismissal.
This is a very important point.
The reason for dismissal
is not a person's
personality.
The real reasons for dismissal
are the following.
One thing is that he found a job
closer to home and paid more.
This is one thing.
If he leaves because
he is being eaten up by the team,
the moral and psychological climate,
or maybe he leaves because
he did something and is trying
to replace the traces,
this is completely different.
The real reasons for dismissal are
trying to find out
the future job.
The amount of information
of this person is known.
I have already said
that it is necessary
to start from the worst.
The worst thing
is that the person
can tell everything
he knows.
For money or not,
this is another question.
Unfortunately, it is objective reality
that he can tell everything.
Therefore, as a rule,
everything that a person knows
comes from the worst.
The risks associated
with the disclosure of this information
are minimized.
The activity in the unit
from which a person leaves
is analyzed.
Was there any problem
associated with some kind of disappearance,
loss, theft, and so on?
Again, this is a reason
why a person is dismissed.
He wants to replace some traces.
The instruction to a person
who is dismissed
is related to
trying to convince
a person
to not disclose
the information
he knew
in the past.
This is a very difficult
and necessary
instruction.
He should not
do
any illegal
actions
after dismissal.
Here is an interesting experience
of Americans.
They pay money
to a person
to keep commercial secrets.
A person is dismissed.
He is obliged
not to disclose
the commercial secrets
and to pay a certain amount of money
to keep it.
If there are any problems
associated with disclosure,
he loses some money
as a bonus.
This experience is not widely used
in Russian companies.
However, it is not prohibited.
It can be done without any problems.
To inform
the employees
who work with a person
that he is dismissed
and he is dismissed
and that he does not work
with us anymore.
If you want to contact him,
you can.
No one forbids you
to drink vodka with him.
However, it is not allowed
to disclose confidential information.
A company's agents
are informed
that this person
does not work
with this company anymore.
A person can be
informed that
this person
does not work with this company anymore.
They can disclose some information
and do some actions
because they remember
that this person
worked with them.
It is necessary to check
that a person did not take
any databases,
any electronic devices,
any access codes,
any passwords,
any cryptos, etc.
Usually,
the environment
in which this person
was in contact
is analyzed.
It means that the employees
of the company
who worked with him
were in close relations.
It can be a friendship,
a love relationship,
or a relationship
with a company.
The approach to these people
is a certain work.
It is mainly
preventive measures.
If a person wants
to get information,
he will contact
the people
he used to be in close relations with.
Then there is an instruction
not to disclose
any information.
I would like to add
that the responsibility
of the employees
of the company
for various illegal actions
is related to this.
The list of illegal actions
can be very long.
The responsibility
can be different.
I will focus on one problem
that is related to the person,
to the work of the security service
and to the personnel
of the company.
It is the disclosure
of information
that is a commercial secret.
What can be done
with a person
who disclosed
commercial secrets?
The responsibility can be different.
I will try to write it down.
Here is a situation.
One of the situations
is the disclosure
of information
that is a commercial secret.
I will call it KT.
It is a classic abbreviation.
It is a commercial secret.
What responsibility
does a person
who disclosed a commercial secret have?
The responsibility can be different.
The simplest thing
that can be done
and is quite realistic
is disciplinary responsibility.
Disciplinary responsibility.
Here we need
to start from different points.
There is a concept
of a commercial secret regime.
A commercial secret regime
is created at the enterprise.
It assumes certain actions of the employee.
In case of violation of the employee's norms
and requirements,
he can be brought to disciplinary responsibility.
According to the Labor Code,
it is a complaint,
a reprimand.
Here we are not talking
about the disclosure of a commercial secret.
The information has not gone anywhere,
no damage has been done,
but for the violation of the commercial secret regime.
It is used very simply,
very easily and quite calmly.
The most important thing is
that the commercial secret regime was created
and that the employees
knew what it consisted of
and knew their responsibilities
within the framework of the commercial secret regime.
It can be
disciplinary prosecution,
it can be a deprivation of bonus,
it can be a reprimand,
it can be a complaint,
and so on.
It can be a dismissal.
A dismissal
can also be a disciplinary prosecution.
Nevertheless,
in the Labor Code,
both in the old,
the new and the completely new,
it is prescribed.
For the disclosure of a secret
by the law,
various types of secrets are listed,
including the commercial secret.
The employee can be fired.
This is a dismissal
on the initiative of the employer.
I have never encountered
a person being fired on this article.
For various reasons.
First, you need to have very strong
evidence of the person's guilt
to fire him on this article.
Because a person can
appeal to court after a while.
In our case, the court usually
stands on the side of the employee,
not on the side of the employer.
And the employer will need
to have very strong evidence
why the person was fired on this article.
I have no idea
where a person can go
if he was fired
on the basis of a commercial secret.
If it is a record
of a labor book,
then it is a wolf's ticket
that the person will not go anywhere.
Therefore, I would not recommend
to abuse this.
And usually, if it is a disclosure of information,
people still go to other articles.
The classic option is
either consent of the parties
or a disclosure of information
on their own will.
Nevertheless, if a person has already
disclosed all the secrets,
then he can be fired.
This is the kind of article
that exists.
What else is the responsibility?
There is a property responsibility.
According to our legislation,
that is, according to the law
on commercial secrecy
and according to the Civil Code,
there is a full property responsibility
for the damage
caused by the disclosure of a commercial secret.
However, it is necessary to assume
that it is quite difficult
to prove and to investigate
because everything that concerns
the damage caused by the disclosure
of a commercial secret is usually a lost benefit.
There is a real damage,
there is a lost benefit.
The real damage
is usually very minimal.
It can be the cost of a piece of paper
that was taken out of the enterprise
and a formula was written on it.
The real damage can be a penny.
Everything else is, in fact,
a lost benefit.
The contracts, contracts,
agreements are broken, and everything else.
It is almost impossible
to compensate for a lost benefit
according to our judicial system.
Therefore, it is necessary to assume
that if the information has leaked,
then, as a rule,
all that concerns the property responsibility
is very difficult to implement.
Therefore, everything that concerns
the protection of information,
including that of a person,
must be done in advance.
As soon as this happens,
it is already quite difficult
to do anything.
Although, according to the law,
property responsibility is provided.
There is criminal liability.
Criminal liability.
Criminal liability is provided
for disclosure of commercial secrets.
Keep in mind
that this is a criminal act.
This is a crime.
Disclosure of commercial secrets
to the company's employees
is a crime,
not even a violation of the law.
This is not administrative liability,
but criminal liability.
Although there are a lot of subtleties
and nuances here.
This is an article
Article 183 of the Criminal Code.
It has a certain feature.
It is basically applied,
but in some situations
it is very difficult.
I will try to explain these things now.
Article 183 of the Criminal Code
of the Russian Federation
In order to understand
why Article 183 of the Criminal Code
consists of such a large number of articles,
I will explain it to you.
Article 183 of the Criminal Code
Although Article 183 of the Criminal Code
consists of four parts,
it is necessary to understand
how the disclosure of commercial secrets
to the enterprise takes place.
Basically, the disclosure goes
I will try to draw here
The disclosure goes
through
your own
through your own
through others
That is, you entrusted your
commercial secrets to the employee
within the framework of
the fulfillment of your
official duties.
He works with your
own.
Therefore, as a rule, all the work
on the protection of
disclosure of commercial secrets
through your own, it goes
through the motivation of the staff,
that is, so that the person does not want to
disclose the commercial secrets.
If he wants to disclose them,
well, as a rule, he will disclose them.
That is, it must be done so that he does not want to do it.
So, disclosure through others
is, let's call it
disclosure through people
who did not trust your commercial secrets.
That is, you do not give them access.
But they, having hacked some of your
protection funds, they got access to this information.
And basically everything
regarding the mechanism, algorithm,
let's say, protection of commercial secret
is, as a rule, protection
from strangers, not from their own, but from strangers.
So,
based on this, I will just try
to draw why
Article 183 of the Criminal Code
consists of four
parts and why
some parts are used, and some
parts are practically not used.
So, the first part
of this article
183 of the Criminal Code,
I will just read it a little more thoroughly.
For collecting information
consisting of commercial or bank secrets
by stealing documents, bribery
or threat, in an equally
illegal way in order to disclose
or illegally use this information,
a fine of up to 80 thousand rubles is provided
or a fine of up to 6 months
for the amount of the income of the convict,
or a term of up to 2 years for deprivation of freedom.
So, what is the first part?
First of all,
let's draw it like this,
it is protection from strangers.
So,
these are some people
whom you did not trust
with your commercial secrets,
they committed some illegal actions.
Here, some illegal actions
are listed,
such as stealing documents, bribery, threat,
in an equally illegal way.
Here, as a rule,
it is easy to prove.
Easy to prove.
That is,
the illegal way is easy enough
to prove, because it usually
leaves certain traces.
Here,
what is good in this part,
the first one,
is that there is no connection with damage.
No connection with damage.
That is,
a person can break
some of your access systems,
steal commercial secrets,
not to sell them to anyone,
that is, no damage has been done,
the information has not gone anywhere
further, the criminal has not gone.
All crimes are already considered legal,
and, in principle, you can bring to justice
in a day the responsibility for part 1 of this 183 article.
Here.
Well,
let's say,
all that follows from this is a fine
and up to 2 years.
This is the part that actually works,
which is applied, although
everything is limited by fines.
As far as I know,
the deprivation of freedom
if there were, then only conditionally.
But, nevertheless, this is the part that
is applied and which can really
work.
The second, third, and fourth part
is, in general, protection from your own.
The second part of this
183 article.
Illegal disclosure or use of information
that constitutes a commercial tax
or a bank secret without the
consent of the owner of the person
to whom it was known or became known
by service or work is punished
by a fine of up to 120 thousand rubles
or in terms of salary or new income
of the defendant for a period of up to
one year with the deprivation of the right
to occupy a certain position or to engage
in a certain activity for a period of up to
three years or deprivation of freedom
for a period of up to three years.
So, this part,
in fact, is protection
from your own.
From your own.
That is, you entrusted a person
with your commercial secrets,
he took on the obligation to keep
your commercial secrets, but, let's say,
somewhere he talked, somewhere he told,
and there was a leak
of confidential information.
So, here
what else is there to talk about?
Again, there is no connection
with damage.
That is, it is not tied to the fact
that there must be a certain damage.
That is, we are talking about the very fact
that we are keeping the commercial secrets,
the disclosure, we are keeping the confidential laws.
And here,
what else is special?
There is usually no mind.
Why not? Because the next part
is just about those situations
when the mind already exists.
And if you write the first part
further, you can say
that there is always a mind.
Because, let's say,
blackmail, bribery,
hacking of some safes, threats,
they usually do not exist without mind.
So, the second part
is that there is no mind.
That is, you can attract a person
to this part when, as a rule,
when he accidentally disclosed
the commercial secrets.
That is, he has no mind,
no interest.
I already gave this example at the beginning,
when you bring the person you need
to a restaurant, give him a drink,
and he will tell you about the commercial secrets.
Yes, this is already a criminal act,
but there is no mind here,
so it is about the second part,
Article 183.
And if we talk
in response,
all these fines are clear,
and if we talk about the deprivation of freedom,
up to three years.
So, the third part
of Article 183
is also a defense against one's own.
The same actions
that have caused major damage
or committed out of interest
are punished with a fine of up to 200,000 rubles
or in the amount of salary
or income of the defendant
for a period of up to 18 months
with the deprivation of the right
to occupy a certain position
or to engage in a certain activity
for a period of up to three years
or deprivation of freedom
for a period of up to five years.
So, what is the feature here?
The defense against one's own.
So, there is a connection
with damage.
There should be major damage.
Major damage
or out of interest.
Out of interest.
There should be a certain intention.
Roughly speaking,
if a person gives information
and gets a monetary reward
in return,
it falls under the third part
of Article 183.
And here,
what else
I could say?
I would like to emphasize
that this is evidence.
As a rule,
everything related to evidence
in this article
is carried out in such a way
that the evidence is not visible
or, as a rule,
it is of interest.
So, what are the options?
The security service
has information
that they want to get
the commercial secrets.
The security service
may have different activities.
It may be some kind of
preventive conversation.
What can be more serious?
We do everything
to get it to the court.
This is also a certain installation,
a certain decision.
Then this person is given
to get the commercial secrets.
He is not detained at the checkpoint.
The security service
is not detained at the checkpoint.
All the evidence is not refutable.
All this is recorded on video,
on audio.
All this becomes evidence of the basis.
Some kind of interest
is traced here.
The fourth part
of Article 183
is also protection
from one's own.
It is about the same actions
as part 2 or 3
of the current article,
which have serious consequences
and punish with a free sentence
up to 10 years.
This is protection from one's own.
And this should be
serious consequences.
Well,
serious consequences
when the commercial secret is disclosed
is a rare phenomenon.
Here it is up to 5 years.
Although it can be assumed
that the serious consequences
are all that is related to death.
These are the things.
If it happened,
then up to 10 years.
In practice,
part 1 is used,
part 3 is used.
When there is a good interest,
it is usually done
so that the evidence
for the court is not refutable.
Part 4 and 2 are used very rarely.
Unfortunately,
it is used quite difficultly.
At least this is one of the cases
in one of the directions.
Responsibility of the company's employees
is a very important issue.
What can be done
to prevent certain illegal actions?
In particular,
we have considered the issue
of the disclosure of commercial secrets.